CHAPTER IV.
After a return to the prison, a surfer was found to be in a state of nervous excitement
that demanded constant watchfulness, lest she should perpetrate violence on herself
or do some half-francid mischief to the poor babe.
As night approached, it proving impossible to quell her insubordination by rebuke of
threats of punishment, Master Brackett, the jailer, thought fit to introduce a physician.
He described him as a man of skill in all Christian modes of physical science,
and likewise familiar with whatever the savage people could teach in respect to medicinal herbs
and roots that grew in the forest. To say the truth, there was much need of professional
assistance, not merely for Esther herself, but still more urgently for the child, who,
drawing his sustenance from the maternal bosom, seemed to have drunk in it with all the turmoil,
the anguish and despair which pervaded the mother's system.
It now breathed in convulsions of pain, and was a forcible type,
in its little frame of the moral agony which Esther Pryne had borne throughout the day.
Closely following the jailer into the dismal apartment, appeared that individual,
a singular aspect whose presence in the crowd had been of such steep interest to the wearer
of the scarlet letter. He was lodged in the prison, not as suspected of any offence,
but as the most convenient and suitable mode of disposing of him, until the magistrate
should have conferred with Indian seshamores respecting his ransom. His name was announced
as Roger Schillingworth. The jailer, after hushering him into the room, remained a moment,
marveling at comparative quiet that followed his entrance, for Esther Pryne had immediately
become as still as death, although the child continued to moan.
''Pry thee, friend, leave me alone with my patients,'' said the practitioner.
''Trust me, good jailer, you shall briefly have peace in your house, and, I promise you,
Mistress Pryne shall be more amiable to just authority than you may have found her here before.''
''Nay, if your horseship can accomplish that,'' answered Master Brackett,
''I shall own you for a man of skill indeed. Fairly, do man hath been like a possessed one,
and there lacks little that I should take in hand to drive Satan out of her with stripes.''
The stranger that entered the room had a characteristic quietitude of the profession
to which he announced himself as belonging. Nor did this demeanor change when the withdrawal
of the prison keeper left him face to face with the woman, whose observed notice of him in the
crowd had intimated so close a relation between himself and her. His first care was given to the
child, whose cries, indeed, as she lay reading on the trundled bed, made it a peremptory necessity
to postpone all other business to the task of suiting her. He examined the infant carefully,
and then proceeded to unclasp a leathern case, which he took from the niece's dress.
It appeared to contain medical preparations, one of which he mingled with a cup of water.
''My old studies in alchemy,'' absurd he, ''and my sojourn, for above a year past,
among a pupil well versed in the kindly properties of simples, have made a better
physician of me than many that claimed medical degree. Here, woman, the child is yours,
she is none of mine. Neither will she recognize my voice or aspect as a father's. Administer this
drug, therefore, with thine own hand.'' As to repel the offered medicine, at the same time,
he gave me to strongly mark the prehension into his face.
''Wouldst thou avenge thyself on the innocent babe?'' whispered she.
''Foolish woman,'' responded the physician, half coldly, half soothingly.
''What should hail me to harm this misbegotten and miserable babe? The medicine is potent for good,
and were it my child, yeah, my own, as well as thine, I could do no better for it.''
As she still hesitated, being in fact in so reasonable a state of mind, he took the infant
in his arms and himself administered the drug. It soon proved his efficacy, and redeemed Litch's
pledge. The mounted little patient subsided, its convulsive tossing gradually ceased, and in a few
moments, as is the custom of young children after relief from pain, it sank into a profound and dewy
slumber. The physician, as he had a fair right to be turned, next bestowed his attention on the
mother. With calm and intense scrutiny, he felt her pulse, looked into her eyes, a gaze that made
her heart shrink and shudder, because so familiar, and yet so strange and cold, and, finally,
satisfied with his investigation, proceeded to mingle another drug.
''I know not left nor in the panthe,'' remarked he, ''but I have learned many new secrets in the
wilderness, and here is one of them, a recipe that an Indian taught me, in the quiet of some lessons
of my own, that was all asparacelsus. Drink it. It may be less soothing than a sinless conscience,
that I cannot give thee, but it will come to swell and heaving of thy passion, like oil thrown on the
tempestuous sea.'' He presented the cup to Esther, who received it with a slow, earnest look into
his face, not precisely a look of fear, yet full of doubt and questioning as to what his purpose
might be. She looked also at her slumbering child. ''I have thought of death,'' said she,
''I have wished for it, would even have prayed for it,
retweeted such as I should pray for anything. Yet, if death be in this cup,
I bid thee think again, here thy behold is me coiffed. See, it is even now at my lips.''
''Drink, then,'' replied he, still with the same cool composure.
''Thus thou know me so little, Esther Prine, or my purposes won't be so shallow.
Even if I imagine a scheme of vengeance, what could I do better for my object than to let thy
live, than to give thy medicines against all harm and peril of life, so that this burning shame may
still blaze upon thy bosom?'' As he spoke, he laid his long forefinger on scarlet leather,
which her width seemed scorched into Esther's breast, as if it had been red hot. He noticed
that her involuntarily gestured and smiled. ''Leave, therefore, and bear about thy doom with thee,
in the eyes of men and women, in the eyes of him whom thou didst call thy husband,
in the eyes of yonder child, and, that thou mayest live, take off this drug.''
Without further exhalation or delay, Esther Prine drained the cup, and, at notion of demand of skill,
seated herself on the bed, where the child was sleeping, while he drew the only chair
which the room afforded, and took his own seat beside her. She could not but tremble at these
preparations, for she felt that, having now done all that humanity or principle, or, if so it were,
a refined cruelty impaled him to do for the life of physical suffering,
he was next to treat with her as the man whom she had most deeply and irreparably injured.
''Hester,'' said he, ''I ask not wherefore, nor how, thou hast fallen into the pits, or, say,
rather, thou hast ascended to the pedestal of infamy on which I found thee. The reason is not
hard to seek. It was my folly and thy weakness. I, a man of thought, the bookwarden of great
labouries, a man already in decay, having given my best years to feed the hungry dream of knowledge,
what had I to do with youth and beauty like thine own? Mishappen from my birth hour. How
could I delude myself with the idea that intellectual gifts might reveal physical deformity in a young
girl's fantasy? Men call me wise. If sages were ever wise in their own behove, I might have foreseen
all this. I might have known that, as I came out of the vast and dismal forest and entered this
settlement of Christian men, the very first object to meet my eyes would be thyself,
Hester Pryne, standing up, a statue of ignominy before the people. Nay, from the moment when he
gathered, a married pair, I might have beheld the bell-fire of that scarlet letter blazing at
the end of our path. Thou knowest, said Hester, for, depressed as she was, she could not endure
this last quiet step at the token of her shame. Thou knowest that I was frank with thee. I felt
but, up to that epoch of my life, I had lived in vain. The world had been so cheerless.
My heart was a habitation large enough for many guests, but lonely and chill, and without the
household fire. I longed to kindle one. It seemed not so wild a dream, old as I was, and sombre as
I was, and mishappen as I was. That simple bliss, which is scattered far and wide, for all mankind
to gather up, might yet be mine. And so, Hester, I drew thee into my heart, into its innermost
chamber, and thought to warm thee by the warmth which thy presence made there.
I have greatly wronged thee, murmured Hester. We have wronged each other, answered he. Mine was
wrong, when I betrayed thy putting youth into a false and unnatural relation with my decay.
Therefore, as a man who has not thought and philosophied in vain, I seek no vengeance,
plot no evil against thee. Between thee and me, the scale hangs fairly balanced.
But, Hester, the man leaves who has wronged us both. Who is he?
Ask me not, replied Hester Pryne, looking firmly into his face. That thou shalt never know.
Never, sayest thou? Rejoin he with a smile of dark and self-relying intelligence.
Never know him. Believe me, Hester, there are few things, whether in the outward world, or,
to a certain depth, in the invisible sphere of thought, few things hidden from the man
who devotes himself earnestly and unreservedly to the solution of a mystery. Thou mayest cover
up thy secret from the Pryme Altitude. Thou mayest conceal it, too, from ministers and magistrates,
even as thou didst this day, when they sought to wrench the name out of thy heart,
and give thee a partner on thy pedestal. But, as for me, I come to the inquest with other
senses than they possess. I shall seek this man, as I have thought through sin books,
as I have sought goals in alchemy. There is a sympathy that will make me conscious of him.
I shall see him tremble. I shall feel myself shudder suddenly and unwares. Sooner or later,
he must needs be mine. The eyes of the wrinkled scholar glowed so intensely upon her
that, as to Pryne, clasped her hand over her heart,
dreading lest he should read secret there at once. Thou wilt not reveal his name.
Not lest he is mine, resumed he, with a look of confidence, as if destiny were at one with him.
He bears no layer of infamy wrought into his garment, as thou dost,
but I shall read it on his heart. Yet fear not for him. Think not that I shall interfere
with heaven's own method of retribution, or, to my own loss, betray him to the grip of human love.
Neither do thou imagine that I shall contrive hard against his life, no, nor against his fame,
if, as I judge, he be a man of fair repute. Let him live. Let him hide himself in outward
honour, if he may. Not lest he shall be mine.
Thy acts are like mercy, said Esther, bewildered and appalled, but thy words interpret thee as a
terror. One thing. Thou that was my life, I wouldn't join upon thee, continued the scholar.
Thou hast kept secret of thy paramour. Keep likewise mine. There are none in this land that
know me. Bring not to any human soul that thou didst ever call me husband. Here, on this wild
outskirt of the earth, I shall pitch my tent. For, elsewhere a wanderer and isolated from human
interests, I find here a woman, a man, a child, amongst whom and myself there exists the closest
ligaments, no matter whether of love or hate, no matter whether of right or wrong. Thou and thine,
Esther Pryne, belong to me. My home is where thou art and where he is. But betray me not.
Wherefore dost thou desire it? inquired Esther, shrinking, she hardly knew why, from the secret
bound. Why not denounce thyself openly and cast me off at once?
It may be, he replied, because I will not encounter the dishonour that
besmirches the husband of a faithless woman. It may be for other reasons. Enough. It is my purpose
to live and die unknown. Let therefore thy husband be to the world as one already dead,
and of whom no tidings shall ever come. Recognise me not by word, by sign, by look.
Breed not the secret above all to the man thou houghtest of. Should thou fail me in this,
beware. His fame, his position, his life will be in my hands. Beware.
I'll keep thy secret, and I have his, said Esther, swear it, rejoin he, and she took to oath.
And now, Mistress Pryne, said old Roger Chillingworth, as he was hereafter to be
named, I leave thee alone, alone with thy infant and scarlet letter. Who is it, Esther,
doth thou sentence by indeed to wear the token in thy sleep?
Art thou not afraid of nightmares and hideous dreams?
Why dost thou smile so at me? inquired Esther, troubled at the expression of his eyes.
Art thou like the black man that hunts the forest round about us,
as thou entice me into a bond that will prove the ruin of my soul?
Not thy soul, he answered with another smile. No, not thine.